---
title: "The Impossibility of Utilitarianism"
date: 2023-02-15T21:22:14Z
---
(This is a paper I wrote for a philosophy course at University)

# Introduction

"It is the greatest happiness of the greatest number that is the measure
of right and wrong."[^1] It almost sounds like an a priori truth, but it
is far from it. It's the mantra of utilitarianism, the idea that the
total amount of happiness[^2] created by an action determines whether it
is good or bad. In this paper, I will argue that it is incorrect for a
plethora of reasons.

# When should we stop counting

Utilitarianism is based on the fact that actions affect the future, so
to determine if an action is good (according to utilitarianism) you have
got to look at the consequences of the action; if the action causes the
total happiness to go up the action is classified as good. But total
happiness at what moment? For example, if an action causes total
happiness to go up in the short term but to go down in the long term, is
it classified as good or bad? Most utilitarians argue that you have to
look at the long term, but the same problem holds, when should they stop
counting? It is impossible to count or predict happiness accurately for
an infinite amount of time and space; this is because our universe is a
chaotic system; it is almost impossible to predict (even in the short
term). A great story to illustrate the importance of the time frame for
consequentialist ethics is this Taoist koan[^3] about an old farmer:

*"One day his horse ran away. Upon hearing the news, his neighbors came
to visit. "Such bad luck," they said sympathetically.\
"Maybe," the farmer replied.\
The next morning the horse returned, bringing with it three other wild
horses. "How wonderful," the neighbors exclaimed.\
"Maybe," replied the old man.\
The following day, his son tried to ride one of the untamed horses, was
thrown, and broke his leg. The neighbors again came to offer their
sympathy for what they called his "misfortune."\
"Maybe," answered the farmer.\
The day after, military officials came to the village to draft young men
into the army. Seeing that the son's leg was broken, they passed him by.
The neighbors congratulated the farmer on how well things had turned
out.\
"Maybe," said the farmer."*\
\
At each point in time, the neighbors make a judgment, but each time they
could be wrong. If a utilitarian argues that some amount of time is
enough, it is like the neighbors in the story making a judgment based on
what has happened so far, different things could still happen.

# The nature of happiness

The previous section assumed that happiness is objective and can be
calculated with, so another problem for utilitarianism is that happiness
is not a straightforward objective thing. For example, there could be
multiple kinds of happiness. Some individuals might prefer spiritual
fulfillment in the form of asceticism, while others prioritize sensory
pleasures in the form of hedonism (most prefer a bit of both). If the
definition of happiness varies between individuals, it becomes even more
difficult to measure the happiness an action provides. For
utilitarianism to work, the calculation of happiness has to be possible;
if the definition of happiness is subjective, then this calculation
becomes problematic.

# How to count happiness

A similar problem is provided by John Taurek's "Should the Numbers
Count?" he argues that he values the life of another not because it has
an objective value but because he can empathize with the person in
question. "Five individuals each losing his life does not add up to
anyone's experiencing a loss five times greater than the loss suffered
by any one of the five." The loss to the individual can't be added up to
a bigger loss because it would no longer be the loss to the individual;
there is no greater loss to an individual spared by saving more
individuals.[^4] This means that the loss or happiness of individuals
can not be added up in the way needed for utilitarianism.

# Balancing conflicting variables

Let's say that we found a way to solve the above-mentioned problems,
there is still another problem: What should be maximized? Utilitarianism
states that the greatest amount of happiness for the greatest amount of
individuals should be maximized. However these are two variables which
could prove problematic. For example, if we can do an action that
provides great happiness for a few individuals or an action that
provides a small amount of happiness for a lot of individuals, which one
should we prefer? If happiness is quantifiable, the average could be
multiplied by the number of individuals, but how can we know that one
should not be preferred over the other? If happiness is felt on a
logarithmic scale, we should prefer the second, but if it is an
exponential scale, we should prefer the first, but we have no way of
knowing which is the case.

# Who counts

Until now we have only discussed "individuals," but who is meant by
this? Only animals of the Homo Sapiens genus? Sam Harris argues that all
conscious creatures should count[^5], but this generates a host of
different problems. For example, how can we figure out if something is
conscious? If consciousness is a spectrum, should that be accounted for?
If, for example, a cockroach is a little conscious but feels happiness
intensely, should the cockroach be counted more or less towards "the
well-being of conscious creatures?"[^6] Also, because we have no way to
know how other beings feel, there is no way to tell if the brain
activity we see in their brains is really a feeling of happiness. Just
by observing and reducing everything, we never really understand the
feeling; this is also what Thomas Nagel argues in his famous paper "What
is it like to be a bat." To further illustrate, I will explain his
thought experiment: Try to imagine being a bat, you can try to picture
how it would be but cannot know for sure that a bat experiences life in
that way and it is always from our perspective; we try to imagine the
echolocation as a visual sense, but it could be that they experience it
in a totally different way. We could look at how the bat's brain works,
know everything that happens inside it, but we still won't know what it
is like to be a bat.[^7] So when we maximize the brain activity that we
think is happiness in other individuals we could be making their
experience of life worse!

# The nonexistence of an objective viewpoint

Utilitarianism assumes the possibility of objectively measuring an
individual's happiness, but the happiness is inherently subjective.
Happiness is desirable for the individual, but that does not necessarily
translate to the average or total happiness being more desirable; the
desirability of happiness is still individual and only exists within us;
you cannot feel other people's happiness. So if happiness is good for
the individual, that does not say whether a higher "total happiness\"
between multiple individuals is good.

# The is-ought gap

At the heart of utilitarianism is the assumption that happiness is good
and that we should act accordingly. David Hume calls out these
assumptions at the basis of all ethics in what is now called the
"is-ought gap." There is no way to bridge the gap between what is and
what ought to be done without making unprovable assumptions.[^8] There
is no way to go from only descriptive statements to normative statements
because these are entirely different. This gap means that all objective
normative ethics (of which utilitarianism is one) cannot prove that we
ought to act according to their views.

# Conclusion

All these arguments mean that utilitarianism is impossible in every way.
The calculation is impossible because you can not calculate it for an
infinite amount of time and space. There is no clear definition of
happiness. There is no way to do math with happiness, and even if you
could do math with happiness, it is not clear which, how, and why one of
the variables should be preferred over the other in the maximization.
Furthermore, we have no way of knowing which individuals we should count
towards the total happiness or how much. Even if we could, we would not
be able to measure it objectively because it is an individual
experience. Finally, the is-ought gap shows that even the fundamental
assumption that happiness is good cannot be proven. It is important for
us to continue to critically evaluate existing theories to gain insight
into what theories are the best and how to improve them. All the
limitations and challenges make utilitarianism impossible to implement
and fail as a theory for moral decisions.

[^1]: Bentham, Jeremy. *A Comment on the Commentaries and a Fragment on
    Government,* edited by J. H. Burns and H. L. A. Hart. London: The
    Athlone Press. 1977. p. 393.

[^2]: In this paper the term "happiness" can be interchanged with
    "well-being," "pleasure," "benefit," or other terms used by
    utilitarian philosophers.

[^3]: A story, dialogue, question, or statement which is used in Zen
    practice to provoke the \"great doubt\" and to practice or test a
    student's progress in Zen. As defined by Wikipedia
    (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Koan)

[^4]: Taurek, John M. *"Should the Numbers Count?" Philosophy and Public
    Affairs* 6 No.4. (Summer) Princeton University Press. 1977. p.
    293-316

[^5]: Harris, Sam. *The Moral Landscape.* Free Press. 2010. p. 2

[^6]: This is similar to the thought experiment about the utility
    monster formulated by Robert Nozick. (Nozick, Robert 1974. *Anarchy,
    State, and Utopia.* p. 41.)

[^7]: Nagel, Thomas. *"What is it like to be a bat" Philosophical
    Review* Vol. 83 No. 4. (Oct.) Duke University Press. 1974. p.
    435-450

[^8]: Hume, David. *A Treatise of Human Nature.* 1739-40. London. p. 274
